If you're watching this video, there's
good news and bad news. The good news is
that you know that your emotions are
being held back in such a way that it
doesn't feel good and that it's not
serving your life. The bad news is that
you don't quite know how to get out of
it. And that is a really, really common
thing for many people. So, this video is
going to be all about the four ways that
we can see we're holding back emotions
and the toxic effects of them. And then
we're going to talk about how to feel
the emotions in such a way that we're
not holding them back and managing them,
but we're not being swept away by them.
There's this thing about emotions that
most people don't fully comprehend, but
when they hear it, they know it's right.
And and the way I express this is Joy is
the matriarch of a family of emotions,
and she won't come into a house where
her children aren't welcome. that
somehow we know that if we push back
these emotions, we can't feel the joy
that life has to offer us. And it's a
really easy thing to explain just
sematically. So, right now, do me a
favor and try to stop feeling all of
your emotions,
right? Don't let any emotion
be felt.
And what you'll notice is muscles have
to contract for that. You have to
tighten up. And joy can't be felt if
you're not feeling anything else. Right?
So we tighten up to stop feeling the
emotions. Our muscles get tight and then
we don't feel the joy because you can't
feel joy if you're not feeling anything.
You can't feel anything if you're not
feeling anything. So that's the big
trick is just knowing that allowing all
the emotions in creates a life of joy.
And so as we go through these four
things, every single one of them and
we're going to start with judgment.
Every single one of the four things that
are really toxic, they also take away
your joy.
Every time that we're feeling a sense of
judgment towards another person, what's
happening is that we are not allowing
ourselves to feel the underlying
emotion. We're blocking that emotion
through the judgment. So what the
judgment does on a toxic level is that
it disconnects us from each other. If I
judge you, I stop listening to you. I
stop connecting with you. And if I stop
listening to you, it means that I can't
get the wisdom that you have to offer.
It doesn't mean I have to agree with you
to get the wisdom. It just means I can't
cut you off to get the wisdom. So, I
remember visiting a friend's uh house
for Thanksgiving. And it was really
clear that most of the people on the
table believed in one side of the
political aisle and some of the people
on the other side of the table believed
in the other side of the political
aisle. And you could just see they
wanted to not have the conversation, but
when they had the conversation, which
was inevitable because they were all
itching, they just shut each other out.
And so here was this family that clearly
loved each other on so many levels and
they would just stop the connection.
It's really devastating when you think
about how many homes have their
connection cut off from each other
because they have this judgment of you
don't understand if you only got it
right, if you could see my point of
view. But instead of feeling the hurt of
that disconnection, instead of feeling
the helplessness that often comes with
politics, what they did instead was they
judged one another. They got hard. They
they tightened up. They
even yelling at one another. And you
could tell that they all cared. They all
cared about the country. They all cared
about politics. They all cared about one
another. But to feel all that stuff
would create so much grief and so much
heartbreak that they chose instead to
just stop and go, "No, I'm going for
judgment. And so it cut off that
connection, but it also cut off them
hearing one another and hearing the
wisdom that either side had to offer,
even though maybe it's not something
that you believe in. It was something
that there was a point of view that you
could learn from. So that's the toxicity
that really comes along with being
judgmental. And it all goes away if you
say, "Oh, what am I being judgmental of?
And what am I trying not to feel by
holding that judgment?" And every time
you find yourself being judgmental,
every time you see yourself being
judgmental, you can go, "Oh, what is it
that I don't want to feel?" And if you
feel it, you'll notice. I mean, you can
do it right now. Think of something that
you felt judgmental about. And then ask
yourself, what was it in that moment you
didn't want to feel?
Maybe it was grief. Maybe it was
sadness. Maybe it was hopelessness. And
then allow yourself to feel it.
And notice what happens to the judgment.
A second possible symptom of not feeling
your emotions is indecision. And what we
know neurologically speaking is that the
emotional center of our brain is what
makes the decisions. Meaning that if we
have the emotional center of our brain
damaged,
we can maintain our IQ. We can solve the
same kind of problems, but we can't
decide where to eat without a long time
passing. And as a matter of fact, I
believe there's a book called Deart's
Error by a neurologist who talks about
people who had that part of their brain
damaged and it would take them a half an
hour to decide what color pen to use. So
their whole lives would fall apart even
though their IQ was the same. And so
typically what that means is that we are
making decisions based on how we're
going to feel. We might use logic to
decide how we're going to feel, but
we're making the decision based on how
we're going to feel. And the way that
you can know this in your system is in
the following way. How many decisions
have you made to feel good or to not
feel like a loser or to feel joy or to
not feel abandoned? Right? So we do all
this stuff to feel certain ways. We pick
careers to feel certain ways. We get
married to feel certain ways. In fact,
uh there's this great story is I had
somebody come to me in one of the rapid
coaching sessions and
she was talking about how she was
considering a divorce and I said, "Hm,
how long have you been considering this
divorce?" And she said it was over two
years, maybe three years or something to
that effect. I said, "All right, so what
would you have to feel
if you were going to get a divorce? And
what would you have to feel if you
stayed in the relationship and it didn't
change?"
And so she went off and she was feeling
this and at some point later I I got a
hold of her again and and I said, "Well,
what what what did you discover?" And
she said, "Well, I discovered that I
would have to grieve
the loss of my marriage and letting my
kids down if I got a divorce cuz I feel
like my job is to stay married for the
children." But I also realized that if I
stayed married in the same situation, I
would have to grieve the fact that I was
giving this example of living a half
life to my children. And what I realized
in it was that oh,
if I'm not scared of either of these
things because I felt it and I felt the
grief, then the decision is really
clear. The decision is I am going to be
exactly myself in this marriage and if
divorce happens that's great, but I'm
not going to be a half self in my
marriage. I'm going to be my full self
in the marriage. And if that means the
marriage doesn't survive, it doesn't
survive.
And so, as it turns out, which happens,
I think about like 80% of the time when
when I hear somebody say this, is that
the marriage actually worked out and
things changed. But it only changed
because they showed up being themselves.
And they could only be themselves
because they had the grief. They felt
the thing they were scared to feel. So,
that's how it works as far as indecision
goes. And so if you fully allow yourself
to feel the thing that you're scared to
feel and the consequence of a decision,
the decision becomes really clear as to
what you should do becomes really
apparent what you should do because most
of the lack of clarity, the indecision
that comes with it, the toxic analysis
paralysis that comes with it is because
you don't want to feel a certain way. So
it's a great way to locate, oh, here's
another way. I'm in indecision. it means
that I'm not feeling the thing that I
need to feel or that I want to feel or
that I'm scared to feel.
So, a third possible symptom of not
allowing yourself to feel all the
emotions that are arising in you is an
experience of guilt. And so, what guilt
does is it cuts you off from your
natural compassion. That's what makes it
toxic. It makes something doing
something for somebody else an
obligation rather than actually coming
from your heart, actually coming from a
place of care. And I remember this
moment that it like all hit me. You
know, I would be guilted as a kid. And I
would always hear it as my mom, who was
the person who guilted me often.
Sometimes my dad did, too, actually. And
um the way that it would work was that
they would say, "Oh, you're you're
hurting me." And I would and I would buy
that. I' like, "Oh, yeah. I'm hurting
you. I shouldn't be hurting you. I have
to stop doing that." And then that would
immediately have me stop listening to
myself. And so one day, it wasn't that I
can't remember. I was watching this
video and it was a television show. It
was a reality television show and there
is these moms in it that were being
interviewed and they were all bragging
about how good they were at guilting
their kids. They were, "Oh, I'm the best
guilt person. No, I'm the better guilt
person and I can get my kids to do
whatever I want by guilting them." And
there was a series of moms who were
actually bragging about how they were
cajoling their children to not listen to
themselves and to do what they said
through guilt. And it dawned on me, I'm
like, whoa.
Guilt isn't poor me. If you're listening
to somebody's guilt and doing it, you're
not actually they're not it's not like
they're they're they're frail. It's that
they're actually
getting you to do something there. It's
like a force. It's like an aggression.
And then I realized, oh well, let's
think about it as if I'm going to a
party and I don't want to go, but I'm
going because I feel guilty if I don't.
And now imagine if I go to the person
holding the party and just say, hey, I'm
here because I feel obligated, not
because I want to be here.
Whoa. Really dawned on me like I don't
ever want that. I don't want anybody to
say, "Oh, I'm doing this thing because I
feel obligated." I would much rather
find a way that we can do something that
feels good for both of us. And so that
dawned on me that oh wow, acting out of
guilt is actually not acting from
compassion. And more than that, it stops
me from feeling my compassion. There's
this natural thing in us that wants to
be helpful to people. Just ask any
5-year-old, "Hey, can you help me?" You
can see they get excited. We want to do
it. It's part of how we are. Now, maybe
if we're under stress, we don't, but
generally that's how we want to be. But
as soon as you get guilted, you lose
connection with it and you help
somebody. not because you want to help
them. You help them because you feel
like you have to. So, it's a great way
to really recognize, hey, I am pushing
down my emotion. I'm pushing down my
desire to help. I'm pushing down my
desire to not go to the party. I'm
pushing down an emotional experience if
I'm acting out of guilt. It literally
makes me tighten down
to feel guilt and act out of guilt. And
if you say to yourself again something
to the effect of what do I have to feel
if I couldn't feel guilty,
then you can get in touch with what's
really going on there.
So the final possible symptom of not
feeling your emotions is dissociation,
which means that you have left yourself
because you think you're overwhelmed by
the emotional process. And so there's
lots of ways of doing that. There's a
way of just transing out. It looks like
this.
[Music]
or you can just intellectualize and try
to figure it all out in your head.
There's lots of ways of doing it. And
the thing about it is is that it really
slows down a process of transformation.
It really slows down how quickly you can
figure something out because in
dissociation, you're not reading the
signals in your body. It's like imagine
trying to play tennis and not read the
signals in your body. It'd be really
hard to learn how to play tennis. And a
great story about this is that in a very
early retreat that we were doing, we had
somebody and we would talk, you know,
every at every evening we'd talk about
each of the participants in the retreat
and make sure that they were being cared
for and loved and we kept on forgetting
one of the people. We kept on wait 12th
person who's who's who and then
eventually we would discover it. And
after three days of this, I realized,
oh, this person has like dissociated. so
much they've disappeared from the group.
They're the they're the ones that nobody
can remember and very quiet person and
very just not there in a lot of ways.
And what we also realized is that they
were making the least amount of progress
of everybody else in the group. And it
was because they were literally leaving
their body. So they didn't get the
signals of this is uncomfortable, this
is good, this works for me, this is a
lesson to be learned. All of those
signals were not getting were not
getting processed because they weren't
actually feeling their body. And what
was amazing was while we were working
with this person, we kept on pointing
back to the body. Oh, how does that feel
in your body? How does that feel in your
stomach? What what does that feel like
in your chest? would keep on pointing
back and the progress that this person
made it was just so extreme immediately
once they started feeling their body
because they could instead of just go oh
I'm being guilty or oh I'm scared or oh
I'm angry they could feel the anger they
could feel the discomfort of it they
could feel the drive of it they could
feel what was happening in their body
and that's often how we learn there's
lots of ways to know that you're scared
but the quickest way is you feel it in
your
The slowest way is to like discover it
through thought. And so to really
understand your system and how it
responds helps you transform very very
rapidly.
So there's an exercise that can help you
with all of this stuff. If you do it, it
will help you with judgment. It'll help
you with indecision. It'll help you with
guilt. It'll help you with dissociation.
And it is just to feel the emotions,
especially the emotions that you
discover that you don't want to feel. So
if you notice, if you write down and so
this is a great way to do this is write
down okay here are the 10 times I was
judgmental if you feel judgment and and
it can be judgment of yourself just by
the way and if you feel the judgment
then you say oh what's what would I have
to feel if I couldn't be judging myself
or if I couldn't be judging this person
or you say oh if I'm indecisive what are
the things that I'm scared to feel in
the consequence of my decision
Or if you are feeling guilty or acting
from guilt, say, "Oh, if I couldn't feel
guilt, what would I have to feel?"
Or if you're dissociating, just get into
your body and go, "Oh, what is this
emotion that I'm feeling that apparently
is overwhelming?" So that's the first
step is to list out all the emotions
that you're avoiding.
And then the second step is to do
something we call emotional inquiry. And
you can see the link below and you can
just download it. And it is a guided
meditation or visualization of really
teaching you how to deeply feel your
emotions and how to do it in such a way
that you're full of wonder and so that
it's actually something that's exciting
to do. And so if you feel a difficult
emotion every day, it'll change your
life so rapidly. We have had literally
500 people
at this point commit to doing this uh
every day for a month. and to watch the
way that their lives change is just
amazing. Just amazing.
The cool part about all this, like the
added benefit is that all of a sudden
your ability to take offense at other
people is going to go way down. And and
the way this works is so cool. So, for
instance, so many people are like, "Oh
my gosh, somebody might be judging me. I
can't do that because somebody might be
judging me." But when you go through
this process, you can go, "Oh, they're
not actually judging me. what they're
doing is just scared of feeling an
emotion.
Or if somebody's guilt tripping you, you
can say, "Oh, right. Yeah, they're just
scared of an emotion. They're trying to
make me scared of that emotion."
Like, no harm, no foul. It's just fear
happening of an emotion. I don't have to
feel guilty.
Indecision. Oh, right. They're
indecisive. That's really bothersome.
But really, what it is is they're just
scared to feel an emotion. and allows
you to have so much more compassion for
the people that might trigger you when
they're judgmental or indecisive or
dissociating. So that's just like a
little added benefit. It's a really cool
experiment. Obviously, nothing I am
going to do or say is going to change
your life, right? What changes your life
is actually doing the experiment,
bringing the awareness into it, and
finding out for yourself what happens
when you don't allow yourself to feel
the emotions. And when I say feel the
emotions, remember at the top of the
video, I'm not talking about being taken
away. I'm not talking about
compartmentalizing and managing. I'm
talking about just having a wonder,
curious,
explorative mind with the emotional
experience.
[Music]